---
layout: page
title: Research Interests
modified: 2015-02-02T20:53:07.573882-04:00
comments: false
---

{% include _toc.html %}

### Human microbiome

Diverse assemblage of bacteria that harbor all surfaces of the human body makes us great environments to study ecological questions, and to develop a better understanding of the function of bacterial communities from a public health perspective. We have studied human vaginal, gastrointestinal and oral communities to find associations between microbial community structures and health and disease states of their hosts.

### Marker gene anlayses

Marker genes amplified from environmental samples are indispensable tools for deep and detailed characterization of microbial population structures, including very rare members they harbor. The 16S rRNA gene has been historically a very useful gene to target and over the years we have generated tremendous amount of data. One of our goals is to continue developing tools that would allow researchers to partition their high-throughput sequencing datasets into highly resolved and ecologically relevant units.

### Metagenomics

Although marker genes are indispensable for the characterization of the community structure, they cannot answer questions about microbial communities regarding what they are capable of doing with respect to their total genomic content with confidence. Although there are challenges, metagenomic approaches that utilize shotgun sequencing of environmental DNA is key to understand the overall functional potential of a microbial community and we are currently developing a platform to better-exploit metagenomic datasets to search for answers marker gene analyses cannot provide.

### Quality Filtering

Adequate quality filtering of raw sequences is a critical aspect of all studies that rely on next-generation high-througput sequencing data. We develop and maintain tools and methods to perform quality filtering on raw reads generated by massively-parallel sequencing platforms.