
Introduction to the survey data summary
---------------------------------------

{:.warning}
[The survey is located
here](https://forms.gle/RPksYdyihGuSBZMa8). **You still can take the
survey or encourage others to do it**. Since the workflow that generates
the figures and text below is [fully
reproducible](https://github.com/merenlab/mentorship-survey-workflow),
it is possible to update the results with additional data relatively
quickly. If that ever happens, this note will reflect that with dates
and significant changes in results if there are any. The data below
cover a snapshot of the survey results. For your reference, the time
stamp of the last answer in the survey at the time of the analysis was
**6/1/2021 9:25:16** (MM/DD/YYYY HH:MM:SS).

{:.notice}
This section offers a general summary of mentees and mentors.

The survey results analyzed below includes a total of **338 responses**
that reported a single experience between a mentor and an early career
researcher (ECR). The definition of ‘**ECR**’ in the survey includes PhD
students, post-doctoral researchers, and assistant professors (i.e.,
those who typically are advised by others in academia and do not
typically have ‘job security’), and the text often uses the terms ‘ECR’
and ‘mentee’ interchangeably. In contrast, the term ‘**mentor**’ defines
someone who was officially responsible for the training of an ECR and
include PhD or post-doc advisers, or more generally the principal
investigator (PI), the group leader, or the director of a group
affiliated with an academic institution. All data, including data for
mentors (such as their career stage, gender, and minority status), are
reported by their mentees.

### Disciplines

The vast majority of those who filled the survey were **early career
researchers in sub-disciplines of Life Sciences**:

![]({{images}}/discipline-1.png)<!-- -->

This is likely due to the limits of my reach on Twitter.

### Countries

Another limitation of the survey is the geographic representation.
Although the survey was filled by individuals from **a total of 36
countries**, the number of individuals from each country was heavily
skewed, with the vast majority from **the United States**

![]({{images}}/country-1.png)<!-- -->

The figure below displays the list of countries with five or more survey
results, but for the sake of posterity, each country and the number of
responses looked like this: United States: 164 / Germany: 36 / United
Kingdom: 20 / The Netherlands: 12 / Canada: 11 / France: 8 / Austria: 7
/ India: 7 / Belgium: 6 / Finland: 5 / Italy: 5 / Turkey: 5 / Australia:
4 / Denmark: 3 / Greece: 3 / Japan: 3 / Norway: 3 / Portugal: 3 /
Sweden: 3 / Switzerland: 3 / \[none entered\]: 2 / Chile: 2 / China: 2 /
Ireland: 2 / New Zealand: 2 / Poland: 2 / Singapore: 2 / Slovenia: 2 /
South Korea: 2 / Spain: 2 / Colombia: 1 / Czech Republic: 1 / Estonia: 1
/ Indonesia: 1 / Mexico: 1 / Saudi Arabia: 1 / Togo: 1.

### Career stages

Most participants mentioned their experience as **graduate students**,
and the large fraction of mentors mentees have reported on were **full
professors**:

![]({{images}}/mentee_mentor_career_stage-1.png)<!-- -->

### Genders

A **larger fraction of the mentees were women**, and **a larger fraction
of the mentors were men**.

![]({{images}}/mentee_mentor_gender-1.png)<!-- -->

While mentees who were men were shared equally between men and women
mentors, a **larger proportion of women worked with mentors who were
also women**.

![]({{images}}/mentor_mentee_gender-1.png)<!-- -->

{:.notice}
The survey question offered the following choices: ‘Man’,
‘Woman’, ‘Genderqueer / Gender Non-Conforming’, ‘Questioning’, ‘Other’,
and ‘Prefer not to say’. I used this set of choices based on the advice
given [on this
page](https://uxdesign.cc/designing-forms-for-gender-diversity-and-inclusion-d8194cf1f51)
for *Limited Lists*. Another note worth highlighting is the fact that
**sexual orientation was not a question in the survey**. The reason for
that was the following: the more data one collects in a survey, the more
likely it becomes that the combination of information can identify
someone. As I planned to make the lightly processed raw data available
along with a reproducible workflow, I decided to not collect any data on
sexual orientation to maximize the anonymity of participants (even if I
lost control of my online accounts) despite the fact that I believed
that it may have been an important source of additional information.

### Minority status

The survey also collected data on the minority status of mentees and
mentors they worked with. The question was aimed to identify those who,
except their gender, were a member of a minority group in their
workplace based on ethnic background and/or religion. While **34.1% of
mentees were members of a minority group**, only **11.6% of mentors
belonged to a minority group**, to the best of the knowledge of their
mentees.

![]({{images}}/mentee_mentor_minority-1.png)<!-- -->

The bars below show the matching of the minority status between mentees
and mentors. Among mentors who belong to a minority group, 40.0% of
their mentees also identify as a minority. However, among mentors who do
not belong to a minority group, only 23.8% of their mentees identify as
a minority.

![]({{images}}/mentor_mentee_minoritry-1.png)<!-- -->

Each column of the figure groups mentors based on their minority status
(Yes/No answers on the x-axis are given to the question “was your mentor
a member of a minority group”), and each color reports the minority
status of the proportion of mentees who are working with these groups of
mentors.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

So far, the data show that the vast majority of people who filled the
survey were life scientists from the United States, most of them were
women, most of them reported their experience as graduate students, and
most mentors were full professors during the mentor-mentee interaction.
In addition we see that women are slightly more likely to be mentored by
women, and those who identify as a member of a minority group are more
likely to work with mentors they identify as a member of a minority
group.

Experiences of ECRs with their mentors
--------------------------------------

{:.notice}
This section offers a general summary of how ECRs felt about
their previous experiences.

### The overall spectrum of experiences

Since one of the main goals of this survey was to capture the nature of
experiences of early career researchers with their past or current
academic mentors, the most critical question the survey asked to its
participants was the following: **Considering its entirety and its
influence on your well-being and career, how would you characterize your
experience with your mentor?**

Here is how the responses looked like:

![]({{images}}/experience_with_mentor_overall-1.png)<!-- -->

This shows that 58.9% of all 338 participants reported a **positive
experience** with their mentors, and **very negative experiences** were
no more than 8.0% of the responses.

{:.notice}
OK. I will take a break here and tell you that I wrote the
following part until the next subsection only after reading the
experiences of mentees. I had not done it before to make sure they did
not influence the direction of my preliminary analyses. After doing it,
though, I had to come here and add the following text retrospectively.

Most scientists are aware that mentor-mentee relationships can
occasionally go either extremes of the experience spectrum. And
considering all the stories I personally have witnessed as an ECR either
through social media or by watching the journey of other ECRs as
mentees, I did not know what the distribution of experiences was going
to look like. But my interpretation of these results changed as I
continued to work on the blog, especially after I started reading the
words of mentees.

First, I found the large proportion of positive experiences pleasantly
surprising. I even thought that it will likely serve as a relief also
for you to learn that the vast majority of experiences among
mentee-mentor pairs were positive.

Only later I realized that these numbers are not anywhere close to where
we should set the bar as scientists. In fact, 8.0% is astonishingly
large when one realizes the significance of very negative experiences on
others’ life and well-being. Here is an example that shook me:

<blockquote>
She was a covert narcissist who changed the goalposts to suit her
narrative on a daily basis. Being in her lab made me suicidal. I can
barely talk about this as it is still so traumatizing.

<div class="blockquote-author">

<b>Postdoc</b> (♀) had a <span style="color:red;">very negative
experience</span> in <b>United States</b><br />reporting on the
<u>biggest shortcomings</u> of their mentor (♀)

</div>

</blockquote>

As I went through the responses, my initial relief started to feel more
and more embarrassing. The reason I decided to share this relatively
off-topic personal experience of mine openly is because I believe this
attitude is probably a significant part of the problem, and likely more
common than those who did not suffer from the consequences of very
negative experiences typically appreciate. It is much easier for those
who are in the lucky majority to see the proportions of those who found
themselves in the unlucky minority as mere statistics. 8.0% indeed makes
a small fraction of all mentees in science. But people who are
assaulted, or people who suffer from rare diseases make up a very small
fraction of the society, too, and much less than 8.0% in most societies.
But for those small number of people who are assaulted or diagnosed with
a rare disease, life changes irreversibly.

This personal experience convinced me that this is the true power of
this survey. The power of this survey is not the opportunities for data
analyses or summary of positive or negative experiences as a function of
categories the survey fits people into. It is the words of those who
lived these experiences, and the power and the magnitude of those words
that can convince us the importance of working towards an ideal where
all mentee-mentor experiences are positive or very positive, and that
there is a lot more to do to achieve that.

This section still exists as I managed to fight off the desire to delete
everything I’ve done until this realization, and let the text continue
to try to offer a general summary of the data for posterity before
leaving you with [the words of early career
researchers](#the-words-of-early-career-researchers).

### Commonality of experiences within a group

In the most general sense, ECRs believe that their experiences were
common to all other mentees trained by the same mentor:

![]({{images}}/experience_with_mentor_common_in_group_01-1.png)<!-- -->

But interestingly, the extent of commonness of experiences was related
to mentorship outcomes. Only 11.4% of mentees who had a very positive
mentoring experience thought their experience was specific to a few
others trained by the same mentor (defined as “Very specific” or
“Somewhat specific” survey responses). In contrast, as much as 54.2% of
mentees who had a very negative experience believed their experience was
specific to a few:

![]({{images}}/experience_with_mentor_common_in_group_02-1.png)<!-- -->

I find this to be an important result.

The following is one way to interpret these data: mentors who are able
to provide positive experiences to their mentees do it consistently, as
most of the mentees who reported very positive experiences also thought
that their experience was common to most remembers of the group. Even if
the data in this survey is powered enough to make a statement on this,
there may be multiple perceptional biases here. For instance, those who
are having a very positive experience with their mentors may be unable
to appreciate what some of the other mentees may be going through. In
contrast, it may be easier for those who are suffering with their
mentors to recognize others are not suffering from the same problems.

Nevertheless, the marked increase in the proportion of mentees who
report very negative and yet specific experiences suggests that even
mentors who generally are able to have positive experiences with some of
their mentees can have very negative experiences. Putting this into
words almost sounds like a tautology to me since it should not surprise
anyone that a single mentorship strategy will unlikely work for everyone
equally well. Going through mentee experiences later, I could find
evidence for this obvious point in survey results itself where while
some mentees praised a behavior, others saw it as a shortcoming. For
instance, the following is reported by a post-doc who believed the very
hands-off approach was the biggest *shortcoming* of their mentor’s
mentorship style:

<blockquote>
He was very hands off. He would not insist about deadlines for example.
This made me miss some deadlines for fellowships etc. because he did not
reminded me or helped me made the deadline.

<div class="blockquote-author">

<b>Postdoc</b> (♂), <b>United States</b><br />reporting on the
<u>biggest shortcomings</u> of their mentor (♂)

</div>

</blockquote>

In contrast, this one is reported by a graduate student who believes the
same strategy, albeit challenging, was the most admirable trait of their
mentor:

<blockquote>
Completely hands-off approach, which was really difficult at first, but
in the end I believe made me a more self-sufficient researcher and ready
to establish myself in academia

<div class="blockquote-author">

<b>Grad student</b> (♂), <b>United States</b><br />reporting on the
<u>most admirable qualities</u> of their mentor (♂)

</div>

</blockquote>

I think this foreshadows that some of the negative experiences may be
due to the mismatch between what the mentee is expected from their
mentor, and what the mentor is able to offer to their mentees. ONLY IF
THERE WAS A WAY for mentors to be upfront about their mentorship
strategy, so mentees could have an opportunity to find better matches.

We will get back to this at the end of this section.

### The impact of the mentor to the next career stage

Of all 338 ECRs who took the survey, 240 had a major change in their
career stage since the experience they reported with their mentors:
graduate students became post-docs, post-docs became professors, or they
left the academic life behind and moved on to other endeavors.

The subset of individuals who had a change in their career status offers
an opportunity to investigate whether the data suggest anything
regarding what did ECRs do next as a function of their experience with
their mentors. One of the key insights one could gain here is whether or
not those who had very negative experiences with their mentors were more
likely to end up leaving the academic life behind.

According to the survey data, there was a very slight increase in the
proportion of individuals who had very negative experiences with their
mentors and left academia:

![]({{images}}/experience_with_mentor_future-1.png)<!-- -->

Even after *negative* or *very negative* experiences with a mentor,
mentees seem to have moved on with their careers in academia in
comparable proportions to those who had positive or very positive
experiences. But these results on careers are to be taken with *two*
grains of salt as this survey may be grossly underestimating the number
of those who may have left the academic life (since they are less likely
to see the survey and/or have the energy to fill it).

Factors that are associated with positive vs negative outcomes
--------------------------------------------------------------

{:.notice}
This section aims to visualize associations between various
categories of mentors and mentees and positive or negative outcomes of
mentor-mentee relationships.

### Gender of the mentee or the mentor

Does gender play a role in the outcomes of mentee-mentor pairings? Does
our collective mind have room for yet another [blatantly
incorrect](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-020-19723-8)
interpretation of the influence on gender on critical matters???

Well, thankfully the survey data suggest that the overall experiences of
mentees with their mentors do not seem to correlate with the gender of
the mentee:

![]({{images}}/mentee_gender_mentor_exp-1.png)<!-- -->

The distribution of positive and negative experiences seem to be quite
uniform across genders (just to note, while the x-axis shows the gender
of mentees, the inline box plots highlight the distribution of the
gender of mentors within a given category).

One could also ask whether the overall experiences of mentees with their
mentors correlate with the gender of their mentor:

![]({{images}}/mentor_gender_mentor_exp-1.png)<!-- -->
As somewhat foreshadowed by the previous data, there does not seem to be
any correlation here, either.

Gender is out of the way. Moving on.

### Mentor group size

Since the increasing number of mentees will decrease the availability of
a mentor to each of their trainees, group size (as in the number of
trainees a mentor is responsible) is a reasonable factor to consider as
a function of mentee experience.

And it does seem that group size and overall mentee experience have a
weak, but interesting relationship:

![]({{images}}/mentor_group_size-1.png)<!-- -->

It seems the experiences of mentees in groups of less than five people
are relatively more uniformly distributed across different outcome
categories. While mentors who are responsible for more than 15 people
offer very few very positive or very negative mentorship experiences.
And the sweet spot seems to be those who work with 5 to 10 people.

### Awareness of mentors on their strengths and shortcomings

A couple of questions in the survey asked mentees whether they thought
their mentors were aware of their strengths and shortcomings in
mentorship. According to mentees, the extent of awareness among their
mentors were not uniformly distributed across their strengths or
shortcomings:

![]({{images}}/mentor_awareness-1.png)<!-- -->

In the eyes of mentees, mentors were much less aware of their
shortcomings than their strengths in mentorship. But there was a marked
difference between the overall experience of mentees based on the extent
of awareness of mentors in their skills:

![]({{images}}/mentee_awareness-1.png)<!-- -->

Mentors who were aware of their shortcomings in mentoring were more
likely to have mentees with whom they had very positive relationships.

Here is a data-driven tip: If you are an ECR considering a new mentor,
ask them what they think is their biggest shortcoming in mentorship.
Then ask the same question to their trainees. It may be a good sign if
they match. If you are a mentor, think about what might be your
shortcomings in mentoring people.

### Mentors asking for feedback

If mentors who are aware of their shortcomings in mentoring in fact
offer a better mentorship experience to their mentees, then, as mentors,
we do have quite a simple solution to recover from our lack of awareness
of our shortcomings by doing this one simple thing: asking those who we
mentor for feedback.

But according to the survey results, most mentors have never asked for
feedback on their mentorship style:

![]({{images}}/mentor_asking_feedback_01-1.png)<!-- -->

In fact, as much as 67.2% of mentees have worked with mentors who never
even once asked for any feedback on their mentorship style. This
percentage is much higher than the percentage of negative experiences,
which means that not all mentors who are not asking for feedback on
their mentorship style are failing to provide positive experiences. But
the data are very clear on the fact that almost the entirety of very
negative mentee experiences seem to be associated with mentors who never
ask for feedback:

![]({{images}}/mentor_asking_feedback_03-1.png)<!-- -->

It is indeed extremely difficult to establish or test any hypothesis
here, and it is not the purpose of this blog post. But when it comes to
asking for feedback, it seems women do it slightly more than men,
Assistant Professors do it slightly more than Professors, and mentors
who are considered to be ‘good’ by their colleagues (according to
mentees) do it more than those who are not particularly considered good
by their colleagues:

![]({{images}}/mentor_x_asking_feedback-1.png)<!-- -->

### Are mentors making it easy to raise mentorship concerns

If a mentor is not explicitly asking for feedback from their mentees on
the mentorship they are receiving, it may not be the end of the world,
if they are at least making it easier for their mentees to raise their
concerns. However, most mentors seem to make it difficult for their
mentees to raise their concerns with them:

![]({{images}}/mentor_mentorship_concerns_01-1.png)<!-- -->

And the association between positive mentee experiences and difficulty
in raising concerns with mentorship they receive is quite stark:

![]({{images}}/mentor_mentorship_concerns_02-1.png)<!-- -->

Almost none of the mentees had a negative experience with mentors who
made it easier to raise concerns. Creating an environment where it
doesn’t take much to be able to raise concerns is indeed a way to ensure
negative experiences do not evolve to very negative ones.

![]({{images}}/mentor_mentorship_concerns_03-1.png)<!-- -->

But it seems no category of mentors seem to do it better than others.
Although, those who have a code of conduct seem to be particularly
successful at making their mentees feel that they can easily raise their
concerns.

Which brings us to the final point here.

### Mentor has a lab culture or code of conduct document

I think it is safe to assume that most negative experiences of mentees
took place despite the fact that the vast majority of mentors and
mentees are doing their best. But our best is clearly not enough.

Data in this survey suggest that the match between mentors and mentees
play a key role in defining the outcomes of mentee-mentor relationships.
Fortunately there is a way to ensure that match early on by creating a
*code of conduct* or a *lab culture & expectations* document to share
with perspective mentees. These documents help mentors to be upfront
about their mentorship strategy and their key expectations from the
members of their group, so mentees could have an opportunity to find
better matches.

As of today, such documents seem to be very uncommon among mentors:

![]({{images}}/mentor_code_of_conduct_01-1.png)<!-- -->

Yet, the experience of trainees with mentors that provided a code of
conduct seems to be much more positive:

![]({{images}}/mentor_code_of_conduct_02-1.png)<!-- -->

And finally, the likelihood of offering code of conduct does not seem to
be associated with pretty much anything, even though there is a slight
increase among assistant professors from the US:

![]({{images}}/mentor_x_code_of_conduct-1.png)<!-- -->

I believe it is most critical for mentors to write these documents
without reading documents written by others. Because I believe the most
important role of these documents is that they push mentors to actually
think about who they think they are (or perhaps more accurately, who
they wish to be as mentors) and what they want their group to radiate as
a cultural and intellectual gathering. So it is an extremely useful
exercise for anyone who wishes to challenge themselves regardless of
their career stage.

While I think mentors should draft their documents without reading
others, here is a list of such documents I collected online that belong
to various groups if you need some inspiration:

-   [Lab Culture and Expectations](https://merenlab.org/culture/),
    [Meren Lab](http://merenlab.org), University of Chicago.
-   [Lab
    Expectations](https://drkatlab.wordpress.com/resources/lab-expectations/),
    [Milligan-Myhre Lab](https://drkatlab.wordpress.com/), University of
    Connecticut.
-   [Values and philosophy](https://lefo.ca/vie-de-labo/?lang=en),
    [Laboratoire d’écologie fonctionnelle
    végétale](https://lefo.ca/?lang=en), l’Université de Montréal.
-   [Lab Policies and
    Procedures](https://cpb-us-e2.wpmucdn.com/faculty.sites.uci.edu/dist/4/340/files/2021/02/Lab_Policies_Draft_20210125.pdf),
    [Marine Biodiversity
    Lab](https://faculty.sites.uci.edu/biodiversity/), UC Irvine.
-   [Lab Handbook](https://cobeylab.github.io/lab_handbook/), [Cobey
    Lab](https://cobeylab.uchicago.edu/), University of Chicago.
-   [Lab Policies and
    Tips](http://www.avasthilab.org/lab-policies-and-tips/), [Avasthi
    Lab](http://www.avasthilab.org/), Dartmouth College.
-   [Lab philosophy](https://maestrelab.com/en/lab-philosophy/),
    [Dryland Ecology and Global Change Lab](https://maestrelab.com/en/),
    University of Alicante.
-   [Lab Manual & Policies](http://big-data-biology.org/manual/), [Big
    Data Biology Lab](http://big-data-biology.org/), Fudan University.
-   [Trainee Orientation
    Document](https://github.com/Gibbons-Lab/manuals-and-policies/blob/master/README.md),
    [Microbial Systems Ecology and Evolution
    Lab](https://gibbons.isbscience.org/), Institute for Systems
    Biology.

If you are a mentor, please consider writing a write a *code of conduct*
or a *lab culture & expectations* document, and put it on your web page.
I promise you that it will be an exercise that is both fun, and useful.
